---
Title: Quest for the perfect reader is almost over
Date: 2009-09-09
Author: Sergey Stadnik
Category: lifestyle
Tags: [gadgets]
Slug: quest-for-perfect-reader-is-almost-over
aliases:
  - /2009/09/quest-for-perfect-reader-is-almost-over.html
---

Those who know me know that I've been searching for a perfect ebook
reader device for years. I've used mobile phones, Palm PDAs, pocket PCs,
laptops... About 7 years ago I got excited about prospects of
[E-Ink](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-Ink "E-Ink") technology,
promising to deliver just what I needed. Unfortunately, E-Ink has turned
out to be utter disappointment, so far delivering little but bold
promises. It took years and years for the first E-Ink devices to turn up
on the market.

A few years ago I finally got my hands onto [Sony
PRS-500](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sony_Reader#PRS-500 "Sony PRS-500")
E-Ink reader. Got disappointed with it after a week and sold it. A year
ago I bought another E-Ink reader - that time
[BeBook](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BeBook "BeBook"). I still have it,
but now my wife uses it. And I've got myself something better. That is
iPhone.

Don't get me wrong. I still like E-Ink readers. But even after all those
years E-Ink remains to be a promising technology. Guys, it's about time
to deliver on promises. Maybe one day... But now, E-Ink has more cons
than pros: devices are expensive, screens are slow, the screen contrast
is poor. And versatility is even poorer - every E-Ink reader is
practically useless for anything but reading, making you carry yet
another device in your bag. And if all those weren't enough, many
manufacturers lock the devices to just a few supported DRM-enabled book
formats (this is for you, Amazon).

In few short years, iPhone delivered what E-Ink failed in decade. The
truth is, the iPhone's screen is brilliant. I don't know how they did
it, but it's bright, highly contast and it (almost) doesn't fade in
sunlight. Yes, it's resolution is not as high as of some VGA PDAs and
laptops, but it still looks better than any other LCD screen I've seen.
Reading from that screen is a pleasure. Honestly, if I am provided a
choice to read from either E-Ink (in its current state) and iPhone's
LCD, I'd probably choose iPhone.

And unlike the dedicated readers, iPhone is immensely versatile. I don't
know the statistics, but it's got to be the most popular mobile software
platform out there. Thousands and thousands of software titles are
available. And there is no problems with ebook types either - Software
like [Stanza](http://www.lexcycle.com/ "Stanza") and
[Calibre](http://calibre.kovidgoyal.net/ "Calibre") make reading almost
any kind of book a simple task.

All in all, for all of you who has been waiting for a perfect reader -
the wait is almost over. iPhone has delivered yet another revolution.
Now is the time for a major publishing houses to wake up.